---
title: Fountain of the Seahorses
objectid: loc_002
author: Natalie Cinciotta and Eleanor Sullivan
---

**The Fountain of Seahorses**

Located on Fairmount Park, Waterworks Drive, along a well trafficked footpath, the
Fountain of Seahorses is a little-known hidden gem located right in the museum district of
Philadelphia. Situated behind the Philadelphia Art Museum’s back entrance and close to
Schuylkill River, the fountain can come across as unassuming— beautiful, yes — but no
different than any other fountain in the city. In actuality the Fountain of Seahorses is a time
capsule of diplomacy: it serves as lasting
evidence of the dynamic relationship that
existed between the United States and Italy at
the turn of the 20th century while
simultaneously serving as a reminder of the
fascist era that existed in Europe, one that the
United States initially turned a blind eye to. 

**#Physical Description**

Aptly named, the Fountain of Seahorses can be described visually as a white carved
fountain with a large basin containing four seahorses. Resting on top of the horses’ heads and
tails is an additional round basin with a detailed column and spout for water in its center. The
basin of the fountain is 64’ in diameter, and the four horses are 128” high. There is an inscription
carved into the rim of the basin, that reads “La Nazione Italiana Alliazione Americana Nel 150
Annuale Della Dichiarazione Indipendenza 1776-1926 To the American Nation Upon the
Sesquicentennial Anniversary of the Declaration of Independence 1776-1926.” There is a typo in
the English word, Independence (Philadelphia Parks and Recreation). Despite being new to the
United States, the fountain is not an original work, it is a replica of La Fontana dei Cavalli
Marini, built in Rome’s Villa Borghese in 1758, which was designed in the Baroque style and
commissioned by Marcantonio IV Borghese (1730-1809) who reworked the entirety of the villa,
requesting that this new fountain be placed upon the foundation of the last (Sciaretta). This
replica was made of Italian travertine and transported to the
United States in 76 pieces. Each horse individually weighs
over 5000 pounds and the four divided sections of the
fountain bowl weigh 4000 pounds apiece. The basin of the
fountain is formed with 36 coping stones. Due to restoration
work that had to occur, the fountain currently contains new
travertine stone from Turkey after the most recent
conservation work that was conducted in 2012 (Hahn).

**#Object and Creator Background**

The original fountain, La Fontana dei Cavalli Marini, was a replacement of the previous
fountain at the center of Rome’s Villa Borghese. The villa was reworked by Marcantonio IV
Borghese when he acquired it around 1758, intending the new fountain to represent both
neoclassical ideals of strength in history and the baroque fashion of beautifully adorned emotion.
This challenging commission was undertaken by two principal artists. The first was Christopher
Unterberger, born on the 27th of May 1732 in what is now Trentino Italy. While little is known
about his early life, it is known that Unterberger studied under the artist Giambettino Cignoreli at
some point in the 1750s. After his education, Unterberger settled in Rome where he was inspired
by the work of Pietro da Cortona and was mentored by Aton Rafael Mengs. In 1772 he was part
of commission to design the papyrus room at the Vatican Library. In 1780 he worked closely
with the Vatican again, this time participating in replica work on the Vatican Loggia for Russia.
Due to the nature of his commissions, Unterberger focused on historical realism. Unterberger
helped design The Fountain of Seahorses in 1791, and he experimented with “simulated ruins” as
sculpture around this same time. Unterberger passed away on January 25th, 1798, at the age of
67; his legacy was preserved by artists like Antonio Longo, who he helped teach (Bryan 600).

Unterberger collaborated on this fountain with Vincenzo Pacetti, another incredibly adept
artist, and sculptor. Born on the 3rd of April 1746 in Castel Bolognese, Pacetti studied at the
Accademia del Nudo and after in the studio of sculptor-restorer Pietro Pacili. Pacetti took over
Pacili’s studio upon his death. As an independent sculptor, Pacetti served as the director for the
Accademia di San Luca and assisted many high-profile clients with sculptural restorations and
creations. He was the favored sculptor/restorer for Prince Marcantonio Borghese, for whom he
worked on La Fontana Dei Cavalli Marini and many other projects. He died in Rome in 1820,
leaving behind an expansive diary. 

While the main design and creation of the fountain was spearheaded by these two men, a
public fountain on this scale almost always requires a larger team. This detail work on the
original fountain was assisted by three more artisans and craftsman, Luigi Salimei who worked
on the horses, Antonio Isopi who worked on the central support column and, Giovanni Antonio
Berté who worked on the basin (Ai Bene Culturali). We acknowledge similar unrecognized labor
work by the Italian American craftsmen who re-constructed the replica from its transported
pieces, onsite in Philadelphia when the fountain arrived in 1928. 

**#Material and Form**

As stated, Fountain of Seahorses in Philadelphia is a replica of the c. 1740 work Fontana
dei Cavalli Marini, as a result, this structure was constructed in Tivoli, Italy and had to be taken
apart and shipped to Philadelphia. The fountain was split into 76 pieces for shipment, and it was
reassembled on site by Italian craftsmen. Like many neoclassical fountains, The Fountain of
Seahorses construction and design drew inspiration from drawings and paintings depicting
iconography related to Classical antiquity, this means there would be an inherent focus on
symmetry, distinct proportion, and elegance. Despite being a replica, this fountain is not a plaster
or bronze casting, as is typically the case. Therefore, the creation would have involved classic
stone carving techniques (using chisels and hammers) to create the form and shape. In the case of
the Fountain of Seahorses, the stone used was Italian Travertine, which is a white stone made
from Calcium Carbonate (CaCO 3). The full project required more than 40 tons of marble
(Philadelphia Parks and Recreation). 

The climate of Philadelphia does not suit Travertine Stone. As such, over the decades
since its unveiling, the fountain has had to undergo significant restoration. This restoration was 
achieved through a variety of methods. Early restoration involved creating casts of alternate
materials and applying them to the fountain. However, modern restoration must be conducted
differently and involves taking large segments and completely re-carving them, due to loss of the
original material and seams. The restoration material of choice continues to be Travertine stone,
but the place of origin is now Turkey rather than Italy. By the time modern restoration began, the
fountain was missing 75 percent of its original material. According to Philadelphia Parks and
Recreation, the restoration of the fountain also involved a
slight change in design which involved the “[elimination]
of physical barriers to [the] fountain, adding new paving
surfaces and seating area and changing the basin grade
more in keeping with the fountains original
intent”(Philadelphia Parks and Recreation).

**#Historical Background**

Made in Italy and donated to the city of Philadelphia for the Sesquicentennial
International Exposition, this replica fountain was meant to be present at the Philadelphia
World’s fair commemorating the 150th anniversary of the signing of the Declaration of
Independence. The fountain did not arrive until two years after its intended unveiling. Since
1928, It has continually served as a Fairmount
park fountain feature since the location of its
original placement has fallen into disrepair
multiple times and occasionally must be hidden
from public view. What about the original
fountain in Rome? Why was this specific fountain chosen to be replicated as a gift for the U.S.? While it is quite difficult to explain the true reason
behind the choice, some analysis of Italian art history may lead us to a valid iconographical
reading of this gesture. 

Neoclassical themes have been present throughout Italian history starting in the
Renaissance. The power and connection that Italian art has to classical roman styles is a
foundational aspect of its national identity, especially in the years following Italian unification in
1861, and even more so in the strength-centered identity of Mussolini’s fascist regime
throughout the early 1900s. The use of strong, thrashing seahorses on this fountain represented
the power of Prince Marcantonio Borghese when he commissioned them originally (Ai bene
Culturali). Additionally, the use of monstruous sea creatures was a trend along the sculpting port
cities of Italy during the height of baroque style. Thus, the neoclassical styling and baroque
figures of Fontana dei Cavalli Marini combined two powerful styles of Italian art and
additionally, brought up one more reference in the minds of Philadelphian Americans as they
took in its replica. The presence of sea creatures, and the fact that fountains such as this one were
incredibly common in the main piazzas of seaport towns in Italy would have reminded the
American audience of the long-lasting communication and trading culture between Italy and the
U.S. These are bonds that Mussolini would have wanted to remind the U.S. public of,
particularly on the occasion of an international exhibition which would have spoken to larger
political undertones of the period. 

**#Connections with Fascism and American Reception**

To create a diplomatic understanding of the role the Fountain of Seahorses played within
American Italian relations in the 20th century, one must also reckon with the larger geopolitical
factors at play. While the United States role in the fight against fascism during World War II 
cannot be denied, this vehement opposition was not the initial attitude the American public or the
American government took. This was particularly true in the first decade following the end of
World War I. In the 1920’s the United States government (and the public) at best ignored
Mussolini and the fascism he was developing, and at worst favored his anti-communist ideals
while simultaneously being intrigued or even enamored with the way he presented himself to the
world. For Italian American communities at the time, this cautious interest was full-fledged
support. 

In many ways the American relationship with Italian fascism began in Philadelphia, due
to its deep Italian influence. The influence was not subtle at the time, and the first fascist event in
Philadelphia was held as early as November 11th, 1922 (Sessolo). This ease of embrace was due
to the Italian American immigrant populations around the time. These Italian populations
represented communities who were repeatedly rejected and mistreated by the general American
public. The urge to fall back on idealized homeland nationalism is not beyond comprehension.
Mussolini’s role in American culture did not end with these migrating communities. In
subsequent years, Mussolini only became more present in American media: he appeared on the
cover of Time magazine twice throughout the 1920’s (and no less than eleven times throughout
his decades of power)[^1]
[^1]: His more famous counterpart, Adolf Hitler, was only featured on the cover five times.
Mussolini was nothing if not a showman, and the American media
played into this. Mussolini was careful to associate himself with youth and strength when placed
in front of the camera; in fact, he practically invented the understanding of what we now call a
“publicity stunt” (Sessolo). These facets of his character created the path for a new “modern” 
way to portray power, one that was in extreme contrast to the versions that were associated with
wisdom and age.

Mussolini’s image in America was also supported by the false ideal of the “American
dream” and what it meant to be an “American hero.” Mussolini was a self-made man, a trait that
Americans, and especially American immigrants valued more than anything. This is afterall, the
types of achievements that had been promised to come with immigration to America. A true
American hero would be self-made, and even more importantly he would be inherently
undemocratic (Sessolo). To the average American this was a dream that could be grasped far
more easily than the idea of becoming a Roosevelt, a family who was born with the silver spoon.
Mussolini was careful to present these idealized “heroic” traits when pandering to the public, so
his true behavior could go unchecked. 

To put it simply, America was enamored with Mussolini; they were playfully intrigued to
see what he would do next. Italian American communities played a significant role in
perpetuating these ideas of goodwill and support for the idea of Italian fascism in America. This
was the result of numerous factors, nationalism of course being one of them, but none more
important than the benefit of distance (Sessolo). Italian Americans could not comprehend the
true issues fascism was creating in Italy, this factor, coupled with the vast amounts of
propaganda that flowed within their communities made it easy for them to offer what was blind
support. 

This goodwill would not last. By 1935, the United States (and most Italian American’s)
ended any cordial relations or ideals that had existed towards fascist Italy, due to Mussolini’s
invasion of Ethiopia coupled with Italy’s more aggressive actions (Sessolo). All that to say, these
early years of Mussolini and America cannot be ignored in favor of the rest of history. 
Contextually, it is vital to any reflection of the political landscape that would have underscored
the Fountain of Seahorse’s arrival to the United States and thus impacted any public reception to
it.

When the Italian ambassador Giacomo de Martino presented this fountain to Philadelphia
officials in 1928, he had this to say about the connection between Italy and the U.S., 
>blockquote "Created by two national revolutions, America and Italy are destined to understand each
other. I feel happy to say that probably no country in the world has shown more interest
in understanding the value and significance of the present régime in Italy and the
personality of Signor Mussolini, and probably no country in Europe has understood more
clearly the value and significance of American ideals and achievements in the modern
world."
(NYT, 1928). While integral when garnering insight, quotes like these say both a lot and a little
about the intention of the gesture for the time. It is not improbable that Mussolini and his
advisors wanted this connection to be made and thus intended for some of the sentiments that
Martino expressed. However, the engraving on the fountains base gives us a closer look at the
halfhearted nature of this gesture. The typo, or Italian spelling, of the word Indipendenza in the
English translation of the engraving shows a bit of carelessness in this act of connection between
Philadelphia and Italy, even if the bold addition of the engraving in both Italian and English
speaks to the power of connection between the two
countries. Furthermore, the statement by Martino contains a
lot of conciliatory political speak, it would require
suspension of disbelief to argue that this donation of the
fountain truly impacted the people of Philadelphia, let
alone the political decisions moving forward for the U.S.

**#Conclusion**
It is undeniable that this fountain represents a political display of respect between
Mussolini’s Italy and Philadelphia’s leaders at the time. However, the intention of the fountain
becomes muddled when we take into account the fact that it was delayed two years on its arrival,
and thus, any true understanding from the public of the sentiment written on the basin was lost
and not much city wide attention or adoration was given to the fountain in the years that
followed. Nonetheless, the Fountain of the Sea Horses represents something of national pride to
Italians living in Philadelphia and continues to serve as a reminder of the history between the two
nations during a tumultuous period. It contains neoclassical stylistic choices, while also
reminding us of the Baroque era,
where detailed grotesques of sea
monsters and fluid creatures were
common. The fountain is an artistic
reminder of Italy and the magnificent
history of marine-themed fountains
throughout Italian art history. 

***Works Cited***

Italian Foundation Restoration, Philadelphia Parks, and Recreation. (nd.)
https://www.phila.gov/newsletters/parksnrecsnewsletter/pdfs/italianfountainrestoration.p
df

Presents Fountain at Philadelphia - June 7, 1928 - The New York Times. New York Times
Archives. (1928, June 7). https://www.nytimes.com/1928/06/07/archives/presentsfountain-at-philadelphia-italy-through-envoy-gives-a-copy.html
Fontana. Sovraintendenza Capitolina: Ai Bene Culturali (2017)
https://www.sovraintendenzaroma.it/i_luoghi/ville_e_parchi_storici/ville_dei_nobili/villa
_borghese/fontane

Sessolo, Fredrico. “Fascism: The View from America (1925-1945).” Department of
Transnational Italian Studies, 11/11/2025, Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, PA.
(Lecture).

Sciaretta, Fabrizio, Villa Borghese: La Fontana dei Cavalli Marini. ArtePiù, 14 Mag, 2017.
https://artepiu.info/villa-borghese-fontana-cavalli-marini/

Bryan, Michael. A Biographical and Critical Dictionary of Painters and Engravers: With a List of
Ciphers, Monograms, and Marks. Edited by George Stanley. London: Printed for
Carpenter and Son; J. Booker; and Whittingham and Arliss. (1816).

The Art and Craftsmanship Behind Handcrafted Fountains. Luxury Fountains for Your Home,
Garden or Business. (2024, July 1). https://fountains.com/the-art-and-craftsmanshipbehind-handcrafted-fountains-a-detailed-exploration/
Hahn, A. (2013, May 31). Italian fountain restored, getting ready to splash again this summer.
WHYY. https://whyy.org/articles/italian-fountain-restored-getting-ready-to-splash-againthis-summer/

***Images Cited***

Cinciotta, Natalie. The Fountain of Seahorses: horse close up. 2025. Photograph. Philadelphia,
PA.

Cinciotta, Natalie. The Fountain of Seahorses in the fall. 2025. Photograph. Philadelphia, PA.

National Park Service. View looking SE showing “Centennial Anniversary of the Declaration of
Independence” fountain on Aquarium Dive with north façade of Art Museum in right
background. August 2014. Photograph. 5,000 x 3,555. Historic American Buildings
Survey. Philadelphia, PA.

Smallbones. Sea Horse Fountain Fairmount. June 2011. Photograph. 2,592 x 1,944. Philadelphia,
PA.

Tichnor Quality Views. Art Museum, Philadelphia, PA. c. 1930-1945. Postcard Print. 3,339 x
2,139. Boston, MA.

Wallace, Philip B. Fountain of the Seahorses. July 1928. 6,000 x 4,101. Temple University
Libraries. Philadelphia, PA.


